# Rule of 72

Haven't you ever wanted to calculate mentally the number of years required to double your invested money at a given fixed interest rate?
Obviously you can make this calculation with spreadsheet programs, but to quickly find an approximate value, the Rule of 72 comes handy in mental calculations. Rule of 72 is a way of calculating fast the number of years is takes for an investment or your money to double.
	  
$$ \text{Years to Double} = \frac{72}{\text{Interest Rate}} $$

For example, you heard of an interesting investment opportunity with a fixed interest rate of 9%. Given this fact, using the Rule of 72, you can calculate with just a division that 72/9 = 8 years to double your invested amount.

### Derivation

Considering the fact that Rule of 72 is a simplification of a more complex logarithmic equation, we can't rely on this rule when precise calculations are needed. However, it can be used for fast mental calculations, as a pretty close approximation.
The actual calculation that one can use to be precise is the following:

$$ Τ_d = \frac{ln(2)}{ln(1+\frac{1}{100})}\neq \frac{72}{r} $$ <br>
$$T_d$$: Time to double <br>
$$ln$$ Natural log function <br>
$$r$$  Compounded interest rate per period <br>

Let's check the power of the rule of 72:
T = ln(2)/ln(1+9%) = 8.043 years
which is pretty close to 72/9 = 8 that rule of 72 gives.



For periodic compounding, future value is given by:

$$ FV = PV \cdot (1+r)^t $$

where PV: present value 

t: number of time periods

r: interest rate per time period.

The future value is double the present value when the following condition is met:

$$ (1+r)^2 = 2 $$

This equation is easily solved for t:

$$ln((1+r)^t) = ln2 \Rightarrow  t\ ln(1+r) = ln2 \Rightarrow  t = \frac{ln2}{ln(1+r)}$$

A simple rearrangement  shows:

$$ \frac{ln2}{ln(1+r)} = (\frac{ln2}{r})(\frac{r}{ln(1+r)})

If r is small, then ln(1+r) approximately equals r (this is the first term in the Taylor series). That is, the latter factor grows slowly when r is close to 0. 

Calling the latter factor f(r), the function f(R) is shown to be accurate in the approximation of t for a small, positive interest rate when r=.08 (...). 

f(.08) = 1.03949, and we therefore approximate time t as:

$$ t = (\frac{ln2}{r})f(.08) = \frac{.72}{r}$$

Written as a percentage:

\frac{.72}{r} = \frac{72}{100r}

This approximation increases in accuracy as the compounding of interest becomes continuous. 100r is r written as a percentage.

In order to derive the more precise adjustments presented above, it is noted that ln (1+r) is more closely approximated by r-\frac{r^2}{2} (using the second term in the Taylor series). 

\frac{0.693}{r-r^2/2} can then be further simplified by Taylor approximations:

$$ \frac{0.693}{r-r^2/2} = \frac{69.3}{R-R^2/200} = \frac{69.3}{R} \frac{1}{1-R^2/200} = \frac{69.3(1+R/200)}{R} = \frac{69.3}{R} + \frac{69.3}{200} = \frac{69.3}{R} + 0.3465 $$

Replacing the "R" in R/200 on the third line with 7.79 gives 72 on the numerator. This shows that the rule of 72 is most accurate for periodically compounded interests around 8%. Similarly, replacing the "R" in R/200 on the third line with 2.02 gives 70 on the numerator, showing that the rule of 70 is most accurate for periodically compounded interests around 2%.

Alternatively, the E-M rule is obtained if the second-order Taylor approximation is used directly.

##### Continuous compounding

For continuous compounding, the derivation is simpler and yields a more accurate rule:

$$ (e^r)^p = 2 \Rightarrow  e^{rp} = 2 \Rightarrow ln\ e^{rp} = ln\ 2 \Rightarrow rp = ln\ 2 \Rightarrow  p=\frac{ln2}{r} \Rightarrow  p === \frac{0.693147}{r}$$



Taylor: f(a) + \frac{f'(a)}{1!}(x-a) + \frac{f''(a)}{2!}(x-a)^2+ ... = \sum_{n=0}^{\inf} \frac{f^{(n)}(a)}{n!} (x-a)^n 

### Different rates may require number different than 72

An important notice is that Rule of 72 can be applied effectively to a specific range of rates (6-10%). However, there is a way to make it more flexible by adding or subtracting 1 from 72 every 3 points the interest rate diverges from the 8% threshold.  $$ t = \frac{72 + (r-8)/3}{r} $$ or for the same result: t = \frac{70+(r-2)/3}{r}

Both of these equations simplify to:

$$ t = \frac{208}{3r} + \frac{1}{3}

Note that 208/3 is quite close to 69.3.

For continuous compounding, the rule of 69 would be more suitable for any rate, since the actual calculation depends on $$ln(2)$$ which is approximate 69.3%. Daily compounding is close enough to continuous compounding, thus 69, 69.3, 70 are better than 72 for daily compounding.

If we try to calculate with rule of 72 when the interest diverges much from 8%, we can see that the formula needs readjustment.
$$T = ln(2)/ln(1+4%) = 17.673 \text{years} \neq 18 = \frac{72}{4} $$
$$T = ln(2)/ln(1+24%) = 3.22 years \neq 3 = \frac{72}{24}$$
However, with the following readjustment, the rule of..(not) 72 is more accurate:
(24-8)/3 = 16/3 = 5.3 = 5 --> Rule of 72+5 = 77 --> 77/24 = 3.21
(4-8)/3 = -4/3 = -1.3 = -1 --> Rule of 72-1 = 71 --> 71/4 = 17.75


## History
Luca Pacioli (1445–1514), an italian Mathematician and collaborator of Leonardo DaVinci had a reference to the rule in the Summa de arithmetica (Venice, 1494. Fol. 181, n. 44).Even though he presents the rule as an estimation of the doubling time of an investment, he does not derive or explain the rule. Thus its assumed that the rule predates Pacioli by some time. <sup>[3](#refs)</sup>



#### E-M Rule (Eckart-McHale) second order rule

This rule provides a multiplicative correction for the rule of 69.3 that is very accurate to rates 0-20% (whereas the rule is normally only accurate at the lowest end of interest rates, 0-5%).

t = \frac{69.3}{r} \cdot \frac{200}{200-r}



### Key takeaways 

- It can be used as a way to calculate fast the number of years it would take for an investment to double your money (only for compound interest)
- You can readjust the rule to be more accurate depending on the given interest rate.  
- It applies to compounded interest rates and is reasonably accurate for interest rates that fall in the range of 6% and 10%.
- It can also be applied to anything that increases exponentially, such as GDP or inflation; it can also indicate the long-term effect of annual fees on an investment's growth.

### References: 
{: #refs }

[1] [https://www.investopedia.com/terms/r/ruleof72.asp](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/r/ruleof72.asp) <br>
[2] [https://www.investopedia.com/terms/r/rule-of-70.asp](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/r/rule-of-70.asp) <br>
[3] [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_of_72](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_of_72) <br>

